README.rst, before:


``NiSpace``: **N**euro**i**maging **Spa**tial **C**olocalization **E**nvironment
================================================================================

.. image:: https://zenodo.org/badge/XXXXXXX.svg
   :target: https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/XXXXXXX
   :alt: Zenodo record
.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/License-CC%20BY--NC--SA%204.0-lightgrey
   :target: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
   :alt: License: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

*Spatial (alteration) patterns observed in MRI images may often reflect function and dysfunction of underlying biological systems. This applies alike to function and structure, on the surface or in the volumetric space, and to typical as well as disordered brain-anatomical and functional patterns.*

In recent years, several methods have been developed to compare spatial patterns between brain maps. In the simplest case, two brain maps are correlated with each other at the voxel- or parcel-level. The resulting correlation coefficient reflects the degree to which the two maps share a spatial pattern. We refer to this spatial correlation as "*colocalization*". The `NiSpace` toolbox aims to provide the most comprehensive, yet easy-to-use and flexible framework for colocalization estimation, significance testing, and visualization to date.

There are of course many other tools available, of which a few are listed below:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 15 40 15 15 15
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Target Problem
     - Significance Testing
     - Volume/Surface
     - Interface
   * - `JuSpace <https://github.com/juryxy/JuSpace>`_
     - Colocalization between nuclear imaging and case-control-difference maps
     - group permutation, null maps
     - volume
     - MATLAB-GUI
   * - `neuromaps <https://netneurolab.github.io/neuromaps/>`_
     - Providing various reference brain maps, as well as advanced imaging space transformation and null map estimation functions
     - null maps
     - surface, volume
     - Python-API
   * - `ENIGMA Toolbox <https://enigma-toolbox.readthedocs.io/>`_
     - Relationships between effect-size maps and various reference datasets
     - null maps
     - surface
     - Python/MATLAB-API
   * - `BrainSpace <https://brainspace.readthedocs.io/>`_
     - Focus on gradient mapping but includes null map generation functions
     - null maps
     - surface, volume
     - Python/MATLAB-API
   * - `Imaging Transcriptomics Toolbox <https://imaging-transcriptomics.readthedocs.io>`_
     - Gene-Set-Enrichment-Analysis on neuroimaging data using Allen Brain Atlas
     - 
     - surface (volume)
     - Python-API
   * - `GAMBA <https://github.com/dutchconnectomelab/GAMBA-MATLAB>`_
     - Gene-Set-Enrichment-Analysis on neuroimaging data using Allen Brain Atlas
     - gene-set permutation, null maps
     - volume (surface)
     - Web-GUI/MATLAB-API
   * - `GCEA <https://github.com/benfulcher/GeneCategoryEnrichmentAnalysis>`_
     - Gene-Set-Enrichment-Analysis on neuroimaging data using Allen Brain Atlas
     - gene-set permutation, null maps
     - volume (surface)
     - MATLAB-API

``NiSpace`` tries to incorporate most of the functionality of these tools in a unified framework. It took many ideas and implementations from the toolboxes listed above. Two prior tools developed by me (Leon Lotter) – `JuSpyce <https://github.com/leondlotter/JuSpyce>`_ (basis for ``NiSpace``, Python) and `ABAnnotate <https://github.com/leondlotter/ABAnnotate>`_ (easy-to-use neuroimaging gene-set enrichment based on `GCEA <https://github.com/benfulcher/GeneCategoryEnrichmentAnalysis>`_, MATLAB) – were discontinued in favor of ``NiSpace``.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 15 40 15 15 15
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Target Problem
     - Significance Testing
     - Volume/Surface
     - Interface
   * - `NiSpace <https://github.com/LeonDLotter/NiSpace>`_
     - Colocalization between two or multiple brain maps in single-map, case-control, and set-enrichment settings. Generalizes set-enrichment approach to all kinds of reference maps. Incorporates advanced imaging space transformation through neuromaps. Includes a large range of reference datasets
     - null maps, group permutation, set permutation
     - volume, surface
     - Python-API (GUI planned)


Installation
------------

You can install ``NiSpace`` in a Python 3.9+ environment using pip:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install git+https://github.com/LeonDLotter/NiSpace.git@dev


Citation
--------

There is no paper for ``NiSpace`` yet. Please cite at least the following when you use our tools in your work:
* `Dukart et al., HBM 2021 <https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.25244>`_
* `Markello, Hansen, et al., Nat. Methods 2022 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01625-w>`_

See the documentation's `citation <https://nispace.readthedocs.io/en/latest/citation.html>`_ section for more information.


Contact
-------

Do you have questions, comments or suggestions, or would like to contribute to the toolbox? Feel free to open an issue here on GitHub or [contact me](mailto:leondlotter@gmail.com)!

Commit message:

several updates associated with documentation and data download

README.rst, after:


``NiSpace``: NeuroImaging Spatial Colocalization Environment
================================================================================

.. image:: https://zenodo.org/badge/XXXXXXX.svg
   :target: https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/XXXXXXX
   :alt: Zenodo record
.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/License-CC%20BY--NC--SA%204.0-lightgrey
   :target: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
   :alt: License: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

*Spatial (alteration) patterns observed in MRI images may often reflect function and dysfunction of underlying biological systems. This applies alike to function and structure, on the surface or in the volumetric space, and to typical as well as disordered brain-anatomical and functional patterns.*

In recent years, several methods have been developed to compare spatial patterns between brain maps. In the simplest case, two brain maps are correlated with each other at the voxel- or parcel-level. The resulting correlation coefficient reflects the degree to which the two maps share a spatial pattern. We refer to this spatial correlation as "*colocalization*". The `NiSpace` toolbox aims to provide the most comprehensive, yet easy-to-use and flexible framework for colocalization estimation, significance testing, and visualization to date.

There are of course many other tools available, of which a few are listed below:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 15 40 15 15 15
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Target Problem
     - Significance Testing
     - Volume/Surface
     - Interface
   * - `JuSpace <https://github.com/juryxy/JuSpace>`_
     - Colocalization between nuclear imaging and case-control-difference maps
     - group permutation, null maps
     - volume
     - MATLAB-GUI
   * - `neuromaps <https://netneurolab.github.io/neuromaps/>`_
     - Providing various reference brain maps, as well as advanced imaging space transformation and null map estimation functions
     - null maps
     - surface, volume
     - Python-API
   * - `ENIGMA Toolbox <https://enigma-toolbox.readthedocs.io/>`_
     - Relationships between effect-size maps and various reference datasets
     - null maps
     - surface
     - Python/MATLAB-API
   * - `BrainSpace <https://brainspace.readthedocs.io/>`_
     - Focus on gradient mapping but includes null map generation functions
     - null maps
     - surface, volume
     - Python/MATLAB-API
   * - `Imaging Transcriptomics Toolbox <https://imaging-transcriptomics.readthedocs.io>`_
     - Gene-Set-Enrichment-Analysis on neuroimaging data using Allen Brain Atlas
     - 
     - surface (volume)
     - Python-API
   * - `GAMBA <https://github.com/dutchconnectomelab/GAMBA-MATLAB>`_
     - Gene-Set-Enrichment-Analysis on neuroimaging data using Allen Brain Atlas
     - gene-set permutation, null maps
     - volume (surface)
     - Web-GUI/MATLAB-API
   * - `GCEA <https://github.com/benfulcher/GeneCategoryEnrichmentAnalysis>`_
     - Gene-Set-Enrichment-Analysis on neuroimaging data using Allen Brain Atlas
     - gene-set permutation, null maps
     - volume (surface)
     - MATLAB-API

``NiSpace`` tries to incorporate most of the functionality of these tools in a unified framework. It took many ideas and implementations from the toolboxes listed above. Two prior tools developed by me (Leon Lotter) – `JuSpyce <https://github.com/leondlotter/JuSpyce>`_ (basis for ``NiSpace``, Python) and `ABAnnotate <https://github.com/leondlotter/ABAnnotate>`_ (easy-to-use neuroimaging gene-set enrichment based on `GCEA <https://github.com/benfulcher/GeneCategoryEnrichmentAnalysis>`_, MATLAB) – were discontinued in favor of ``NiSpace``.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 15 40 15 15 15
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Target Problem
     - Significance Testing
     - Volume/Surface
     - Interface
   * - `NiSpace <https://github.com/LeonDLotter/NiSpace>`_
     - Colocalization between two or multiple brain maps in single-map, case-control, and set-enrichment settings. Generalizes set-enrichment approach to all kinds of reference maps. Incorporates advanced imaging space transformation through neuromaps. Includes a large range of reference datasets
     - null maps, group permutation, set permutation
     - volume, surface
     - Python-API (GUI planned)


Installation
------------

You can install ``NiSpace`` in a Python 3.9+ environment via command line using pip:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install git+https://github.com/LeonDLotter/NiSpace.git@dev

To use the integrated datasets, parcellations, and templates, run the following in Python (only needed one time):

.. code-block:: python

   import nispace
   nispace.datasets.download_datasets()


Citation
--------

There is no paper for ``NiSpace`` yet. Please cite at least the following when you use our tools in your work:

* `Dukart et al., HBM 2021 <https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.25244>`_
* `Markello, Hansen, et al., Nat. Methods 2022 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01625-w>`_

See the documentation's `citation <https://nispace.readthedocs.io/en/latest/citation.html>`_ section for more information.


Contact
-------

Do you have questions, comments or suggestions, or would like to contribute to the toolbox? Feel free to open an issue here on GitHub or `contact me <mailto:leondlotter@gmail.com>`_!
